When working with arithmetic operations in particular multiplication and addition, you often come across
these three properties in algebra: the associative property the commutative property and the distributive
property.
In this video I'm going to give you a quick reminder of what these three properties mean and then when
we switch to Python you will see how to use python as a tool to understand these properties.
So let's begin with associative, not because it's the most important principle, but because it starts
with an A and that's alphabetically the first in this list.
So the associative rule basically says that you can move parentheses around wherever you want.
It probably would be easier to remember if they would have called this the parentheses rule instead
of the associative rule.
But essentially this means that if we have two times the quantity three times four, I can move these
parentheses around and put the parentheses around two times three and put four outside the parentheses.
So these two expressions are the same and that you can see by evaluating them piecewise.
So three times four is 12 two times three and six.
And then you do this multiplication and this multiplication and you get twenty four in both ways.
Now when you're working through principles in mathematics I find it useful to start with concrete examples,
with actual numbers like this.
However, it's always good to demonstrate these principles using more abstract mathematical approaches
for example using variables, symbolic variables.
And that's because when you have actual numbers like this you might run into some weird special cases
that don't actually generalize.
For example, if one of these numbers was a zero then the result is going to be zero equals zero.
Even if the associative rule weren't true.
So we want to make sure that this associative rule works and other principles in mathematics will work
not just for these particular numbers but for any numbers in general.
Okay.
So therefore you replace the numbers with letters.
And of course in this case you arrive at the same conclusion.
So the associative rule is valid for algebra when these letters are corresponding to individual numbers.
Okay.
So that was the associative rule.
It probably should be called the parentheses rule but whatever.
Now we get to the commutative rule, and this basically means that you can swap the order of multiplication.
So A times B is the same thing as B times A. The way that I remember the commutative rule or the commutative
property is like you're going to a commute to work.
So here you are at home and then you commute to work, and then you're at work and you can be home.
I don't know if that's a good way to remember this property but that's what I use.
And this also applies to more than two individual numbers so for example A times B times C equals
B times A time C equals C times A times B. Basically you can swap around the order and as long as you're
still doing multiplication, as long as these letters correspond to individual numbers, it's no problem
whatsoever.
Finally, we get to the distributive rule and that's where if you have some number that's multiplying
the sum or the difference of two numbers in parentheses then you can distribute what's outside the parenthesis
to what's to each of the terms inside the parentheses.
So here x times the quantity y plus z equals X times Y plus X times z.
So now let's switch to Python and I'm going to show you how to use the sympy toolbox to illustrate
these principles. So we are certainly going to need the sympy module, so I'm going to start by importing
this module here.
All right.
So let's start with the associative rule.
So I'm going to create two expressions so expression 1 will be equal to how about X times four times
Y and then I'm going to make expression to be the same letters and numbers but I'm going to move the parentheses
around, so now it's going to be x times four in parentheses and then all of this business times Y.
Now obviously that should be expression two.
Now obviously when I run this code it's not going to work immediately and that's because I haven't defined
X and I haven't defined y.
So let's write from sympify dot
A B C import X comma Y.
Okay.
So now we get these two expressions.
And now how can we show that these two expressions are equal to each other?
How can we show that these are the same thing?
Well the idea here, which comes up often when trying to show equality in Python, is to assume,
so we're going to start from an equation that looks like this: now this is actually not a piece of code
that I want to run that's just going to overwrite expression one with expression two.
I'm just illustrating a math expression.
So if I want to show that these two expressions, these two sides of the equation, are equal to each other,
one thing I can do is subtract them and then essentially I want to see that when I subtract them.
The answer is zero.
So let's do that.
OK.
So here I say expression 1 minus expression 2.
And if the answer is zero then that means that these two are equal to each other.
All right.
So that was for associative.
Let's go to commutative and here what I'm going to do is create three expressions.
Also using x y and four I don't know why I'm having the number four here. It feels like a four day doesn't
it?
Actually I'm recording this on a Thursday and I think that is the fourth day of the week ;)
So let's say e1 equals four times x times y. e2 equals, Let's go for X times four times Y and
then E3 is what do we have here.
So we haven't had Y in the first place.
Yes let's do Y times x times four.
Okay.
So that also looks nice because you get the four is going down the diagonal like this.
So what I want to do here is basically substitute for x and y, some different numbers and show that these
three expressions all evaluate to the same number.
So just a quick reminder about substitutions in sympy.
So I can substitute e1 dot subs.
That's the function that I'm calling -- a method inside this or associated with this e1 object, this
sympy object. And then let's say I want to replace X with how about three.
So now the answer is or the output is 12 y and that's because when you substitute X for three you get
four times three is 12.
And we still have a Y here because I haven't told sympy what to replace the Y with.
Now if I want to replace both the x and the Y then I have to use what's called a dictionary.
And the way that works here, the proper syntax, is to say X colon 3 and then Y colon whatever we want
to substitute y with... how about 2.
Okay.
And now we get 24 and that also makes sense.
We already saw that this was twelve when I substituted three for X and then 12 times two is twenty four.
Okay.
So now what I'm going to do is essentially print out all three of these equations with these numbers,
and if these three expressions are equal to each other, then the three outputs resulting from these three
different substitutions should also be equal to each other, which they are.
Again, the idea is that I want to show you a few different ways of exploring mathematical concepts using
Python.
And in this case the sympy toolbox.
All right so let's move on.
We next have the distributive rule. So the distributive property actually.
So here is what I want to do is create an expression that is A plus B times C plus D.
Now of course I haven't created any of these variables yet, and I want these to be symbolic variables.
So let's say A B C D equals sym
dot symbols a comma B comma C comma D.
So you can see that sometimes I use this syntax for creating symbolic variables and sometimes I use
this syntax.
In truth, I actually prefer using this syntax because this is also useful for creating longer named variables,
let's say if I wanted to create a symbolic variable called Mike. But it's good to be familiar with various
syntaxes and formatting in Python anyway.
So here we have our expression.
Now let's see what this expression looks like.
So in fact this is literally just exactly what I wrote.
But what I want to try now is expanding this.
So sympy dot expand expression, and now the sympy module is expanding this so it does the a times
C and the a times D and then B times C and B times D.
Okay so this highlights the distributive rule, and actually the way that I showed it in these slides
was slightly simpler.
I had it just with one term over here on the left and here you can see that when sympy expands this
expression, he writes out a times C plus a times D. So here is the exercise for this video.
Here you see two equations, two expressions: F one equals this thing and F two equals this thing.
Now what is x and y and z.
So the idea here is that y and z are variables and X is itself a function of some other variable w.
So what you want to do in this exercise is implement these expressions in Python and then you want to
display and simplify f1 times F2.
So basically multiply these two equations by each other.
And when you're finished with that, then you can show that the commutative property holds.
In this case and you can use some of the tools that I showed you how to use in this video.
All right.
So I hope you've paused the video and had a go at this.
I'm now going to switch to Python and show you how I would approach solving a problem like this.
Okay so let's start by creating the variables that we need.
So we need X Y and Z and X was a function of W so we also need that.
So let's say sym dot symbols, and then we need X Y Z W and here I'm even using another slightly different
notation compared to how I created these symbolic variables here.
Just showing you that you don't actually need these commas in here.
Okay.
So I'm going to start by writing out X. So x equals...
this was w times four minus W plus one over w squared times one plus W.
Okay so that was X and then we had f1, and that was equal to x times Y plus z. By the way,
notice an interesting programming concept here.
So I created one variable X to be a function of W and now I'm using that variable X to create this other
expression f1.
So python is going to know that when he's there when it runs across X here then this one letter here
needs to be replaced by this entire expression here.
Okay so that was f1 and then f2 was 3 divided by X plus X squared.
So run this cell make sure we don't get any errors.
So this is all fine.
And now what I want to do is display some of these things, so the first thing we had to do was display
F1 times F2.
And this is just a lot of letters and symbols.
This is really hard to visually interpret.
So what I'm going to do is activate the display and math functions.
So that was from IPython dot display import display and math.
OK so now I need to say display and then math and then since that latex to convert this expression from
a sympy object into latex code, and that goes into the math function and that goes into the display
function and then we get this.
Now this is still quite a quite an eyeful.
This is quite a long expression.
I wonder if we can simplify this expression. Let's see.
I'm going to copy and then paste this code. And now before putting this sympy object into latex.
I'm going to see if I can simplify it at all.
Well actually what I'm going to see is whether Python can simplify this.
All right.
So we get a slightly different answer.
Well, it's the same answer of course; it's the same expression, but it is a little bit simplified it still
is quite a lot going on here. But at least it's easier to look at than this really long expression.
Okay so what we want to do now is show that the commutative property holds and the commutative property
is that f1 times F2 equals F2 times F1.
So how can we go about doing this?
I think the way that I'm going to implement this is by writing out F1 times F2 minus F2 times
F1.
And again, the idea is that if these two expressions are equal to each other, then when I subtract them
I should get a result of zero.
And so that's the idea here.
All right.
And we do in fact get zero.
And that means that Python is telling us that f1 times F2 is the same thing as F2 times F1.
So in this video you got a review or reminder of the these three important properties in algebra and
you saw a little bit more detail in Python about how to check for equality of expressions.